---
layout: post
title: PHP
slug: php-reflections
tags: [programming, posts]
author: Florian
---

I recently built [Job Board Job Board](http://jobboardjobboard.com/) (now defunct) in PHP. I don't have a ton of takeaways to be honest, but I'll put down my thoughts anyway.

## It's dead simple

This was far and away my biggest takeaway. [PHP](https://www.php.net/manual/en/features.php) is incredibly easy to start using. Not only did it come pre-installed on my Mac, but so did Apache. I pretty much just pointed Apache to a new folder I made and then ran ```apachectl start```. Done!

I can really see the appeal of the language:

- Everything is in one place: The logic and the HTML.
- It's robust with a lot of built in functionality. I didn't have to add any 3rd party libraries to do simple GET requests and XML parsing.
- *How* it runs is pretty clear too. Once that part of the page is hit, the code is executed.
- A page in PHP is a page in the app too. There's no concepts of routing or needing to add a backend. Just drop a new PHP file in. Much like my experience with [Chrome Extensions](https://floverfelt.org/posts/writing-a-chrome-extension).

The things I didn't like are fairly pedantic:

- I hate the use of $ as a reserved symbol. Writing ```private String someVariable = "someValue";``` doesn't require me to use Shift. ```$someVariable = "someValue";``` does and that bothered me. Super silly but I could see this getting really annoying with large codebases.
- You have to ```echo``` html. At least the basic PHP tutorials encouraged this. I wish the convention to write to the file used a more descriptive keyword like ```write``` or something. ```echo``` reminds me too much of ```println``` in Java.

## Will I use it again?

Maybe? I wasn't really sold on it the way I was with [Node](https://floverfelt.org/posts/gist-secrets-reflections). I honestly don't mind the seperation of the front-end and the back-end that seems to plague so many people. Maybe because I'm already using that convention at work and it's what's familiar?

My hot take/controversial opinion is that a good basic web app implementation would simply dump all the data you need into JSON in a ```<script>``` tag at the top of an HTML file using a templating engine. Then, an associated JavaScript file would parse and display the data in the page. Assuming the templating engine knows that there's only a single injection point (read: it doesn't have to scan the whole file), you'd wind up with a really fast web app that still pretty clearly seperates the frontend and the backend.

PHP is a really strong language, but I'd honestly only use it again if I had a compelling reason. Node, SpringMVC, and Django/Flask are all easier to use and more familiar from my point of view.

On to the next project!