---
published: false
layout: post
slug: the-media
tags:
  - posts
author: Florian
---

People like to use the phrase "The Media." The media is feeding you [corporate lies](https://twitter.com/elonmusk/status/1482853293814599686)! The media isn't focusing enough on X! The media is a bulwark of democracy!

You get the idea...

The problem is, calling something "the media" these days is to be the old man shaking his fist at the sky: You look like an idiot.

## A Brief History

There once was a time, around the 1950s through the 60s, in which American media was pretty homogenous. There were a few major TV stations, every large city had a robust local paper, and they generally got along well with elected officials.

Nixon and [Watergate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Watergate_scandal) changed most of that. Politicians realized they could get a lot more mileage out of the media by attacking it instead of cooperating with it. This became the standard playbook - demonize the media, the media covers the demonization twice as much since it's an attack against *them*, and you get lots of air time to speak to your constituents.

Then, and you know where this is going, the Internet came along. Now everybody is both a consumer and a publisher and traditional labels don't really fit. Newspapers were destroyed. TV stations both proliferated and died out. We've all heard this story before. 

It's a gross oversimplification, but it's the general gist of what's happened over the last seventy or so years. Despite this tectonic shift, though, we still have this concept of "The Media" and it's incredibly frustrating to me.

## "The Media" doesn't exist

Since every essay needs a bold claim, mine is this: "The Media" doesn't really exist.

What we have now are groups of people (I hestitate to even say companies) reporting on things that happen.

Some of these places are more biased than others, some are more truthful, some are objectively bad, some are professional, some are amateurs, etc. It's just an amalgamation of people, and those people's failings will be reflected in the instutions they work for. There's no unifying force. No fabled, singular institution. Thus, there is no "The Media."

This isn't a point about their moral failings or their moral courage, it's simply to point out that referring to everything from Joe Rogan to the New York Times as "The Media" makes you look like a jackass.

## Why this is frustrating

This is [Ben Shapiro's](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ben_Shapiro) entire playbook.

Find something somebody somewhere has written that makes you *mad*. Call that thing "the Liberal Media." Attack it. Use that as further justification for your economic/social/political goals.

What's wrong with this?

### Choice of Target

The problem with demonizing "The Media" is that you can pick *literally anything* anymore and call it the media. [The View](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_View_(talk_show)) has [suddenly become](https://www.dailywire.com/news/whoopi-goldberg-livid-over-being-suspended-is-telling-people-shes-going-to-quit-report) a fabled media institution and we all look to [Whoopi Goldberg](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Whoopi_Goldberg) for guidance. 

That's actually probably one of the kinder examples. You can pick on some random contributor on 











The latest [Joe Rogan Spotify brouhaha](nytimes.com/2022/02/17/arts/music/spotify-joe-rogan-misinformation.html) illustrates what
