---
published: false
layout: post
slug: kotlin-still-not-impressed
tags:
  - posts
  - coding
author: Florian
---
## Kotlin: I'm still not impressed?

I've used Kotlin twice - once at my previous job as the language of choice for a new project and then again over the past week for a new side project I've been coding up.

I'm... still not impressed with it? Despite all the hype on [HackerNews](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=14362975) over the years it seems... just fine?

I remember picking up Node a few years ago and I could more or less instantly see the value add - the frontend and the backend are in the same language, it's straightforward to read/write with optional typing with Typescript, and it's fairly performant with a large ecosystem.

With Kotlin, I didn't really have that moment at all. It seemed to have some neat features and allows more functional & flexible patterns, but that was really it. It did make me think, though, what do I value in a programming language?

## Terseness is overrated

Let's look at the (tired) joke about how verbose it is to run a method in Java:

```java
public class Main {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		System.out.println("Hello, World!");
	}
}
```

Vs. Kotlin

```kotlin
fun main() {
  println("Hello, World!")
}
```

Yes - Kotlin is shorter, easier to read, and easier to type. That's a kind of nice benefit? But I have a lot of problems with the whole "which language is easiest to write a main() method in" debate.

First, programs do a lot of things beginners don't understand. I remember the professor teaching us the whole *static void main...* thing and thinking - huh, ok those are the keywords to get the program to run. I didn't care about what static or public or void or main or String meant *because I was a beginner.* I didn't know what an IDE was but I was using that. I didn't know what a compiler was! Or a programming language! Magic words that make things happen was more-or-less my understanding of programming, a few extra here or there was not the hurdle that was preventing me from learning.

Second, you don't write this method all that much in professional development? I've been writing a CLI recently and that's required quite a few main() methods, but before that I can count on (maybe) both hands the number of times I've really needed to write the full *static void main...* signature at work. In those rare cases, yes, it would have been nice for it to be shorter.

Third, terse languages often trade types for brevity. That's a fair trade-off to make, but I feel like it negates any benefit of the whole "this language is easier to learn because the main method is simpler" argument.

```java
SomeObject someObj = new SomeObject("value");
```

Is redundant to a professional developer, but to a beginner it's much easier to read with the type on the left *and* the right. It's just kind of funny that engineers roll out the main() example and then often omit what's *lost* when you drop all those types. Types and objects are *fundamental* to programming - regardless of the language being static or duck - and introducing them early, even if they won't be fully understood or treated as programming magic, is better than introducing them later.

But, hilariously, [Java supports getting rid of the left handed types altogether if you want](https://developer.oracle.com/learn/technical-articles/jdk-10-local-variable-type-inference)!

Finally, and this may just come down to personal preference, but is my life really all that much better off with fewer lines of code? Or without semi-colons? Do I care? I'm an engineer to build things. I don't really care about the brevity of the code I type as long as it gets the job done in a reasonable way and:

```java
public static void main(String[] args) {
  
}
```

Is not unreasonable to me? I dunno, I wonder what could have been built if JetBrains had just stuck with Java and built several new products instead of investing so heavily in Kotlin. Would Kotlin be missed?

## What happened to Groovy?

Why is [Kotlin loved and Groovy hated](https://survey.stackoverflow.co/2022#section-most-loved-dreaded-and-wanted-programming-scripting-and-markup-languages)? 

A lot of the surface level stuff people like about Kotlin... already existed in Groovy? It's type optional, has a more concise syntax, offers alternate builder/constructor patterns for typical objects, is object optional in many places, has better String formatting, etc.

I have nowhere to go with this tangent other than to say that I had a much more pleasant experience with Groovy than Kotlin. It seemed to know what it was trying to do - be scripted Java with a nicer syntax - whereas Kotlin tried to do too much. It was simultaneously trying to be a superset of Java, but also functional, but also 100% cross compatible with plain Java.

This led to a lot of situations where I had to think:

1. How would I do this in Java?
2. How do I do the same in Kotlin?
3. How do I take code samples from some documentation and translate them into Kotlin?
4. Is the code sample or dependency actually compatible with Kotlin?
5. Do I like the new syntax better? Is it doing the equivalent thing?

The rich library of mature dependencies is one of the core selling points of Java and I really did not want to grapple with step (4) every time I used a dependency or (3) every time I had to integrate a library.

I never quite got to the point where I could just *write Kotlin*. I felt like I had to write Kotlin and Java at the same time - understanding the nuances of both.

## Some closing thoughts...

I feel like programming languages on the JVM are a neat idea, but they don't quite do it for me. If I'm on the JVM, I'd rather use Java. It's there, I know it, and it *just works*. 

If I wanted a "cooler" langauge, I'd migrate off the JVM altogether and use something totally different that isn't trying to do everything-and-the-kitchen-sink with Java.

